Good morning, Minister. Welcome back.
Morning. Good to be back.
We have you here for the hearing
for our Immigration Amendment Bill.
Got you for 30 minutes.
20 minutes.
30.
Oh, 30.
Yes
I was going to say, I thought it was 30.
Yeah.
Good.
We've got lots of time for questions. We'll throw it over to you now.
Great.
And we look forward to hearing from you. Thank you.
Great. I just want to make a couple of opening remarks.
Not too long, I'm more interested in questions, but there's a couple of things I
just wanted to go over. So firstly, thank you very much for having me to talk about
the bill. As you know, it's about strengthening the immigration system, closing
some gaps.
One of the things I wanted to just raise with you was
around the strengthening of the consequences for criminal offending.
We are trying to send a clear message that
creating victims of crime will be met with the appropriate immigration
consequences.
Victims often, as you know, experience lifelong consequences as a
result of the offending,
whether that's sexual violence, careless driving, assault, and we need to better
recognize this. So firstly, we're changing the act so that the victims of
crime can make submissions on the deportation appeals by the offender to
the IPT. I wanted to give you a bit of background for this so you understood,
because it's a result
of the courage of a particular young woman that I'm going to call Diana.
She's said that we can use that name.
Mm-hmm.
I met her last year as the victim of a horrific
crime at the hands of a failed asylum claimant.
The person subsequently used every single avenue available to him to
resist being deported, including destroying travel documents and refusing to
apply for new ones.
Diana told me how devastating it was, having endured a
traumatic court trial, including giving evidence against the man who attacked her,
that she was denied a voice in his deportation appeal against the IPT.
This was because the offending that triggered his deportation was prior, a
drug offense, and not the offense against her, and that's just completely
unacceptable, and I think it would be to most New Zealanders, where someone's been
the victim of a crime and the offender appeals the deportation liability to the
IPT. All victims of crime should be able to have a voice.
So I want to thank Diana. She knows who she is.
She'll be watching publicly for her bravery on this one.
The bill, as we know, and I know you're going to have some questions on this,
it extends deportation liability for
residents class visa holders for criminal offending.
So I'm happy to take your questions on that.
I've already mentioned publicly around changing 10 years to 20 years.
It does it further down as well, but having that
10 to 20 years will pick up people like the Jazz Brothers, and I've said that
publicly.
There are appeal rights and discretion that still remains in all of
those cases, obviously. And the last thing I wanted to talk about
was the bit that I think we'll probably get the most questions on, which is
the targeted change to Section 280 so compliance officers can
request basic information where there's good cause to suspect
non-compliance.
Mm-hmm.
So right now, officers can
act once the deportation liability is already established, which
limits effective enforcement. And I just want to make it clear that this has come
directly from the good men and women of the compliance team, at Immigration.
I've spent quite a bit of time with them in the workplace and also out on
some of their actions. Now,
the issue they've said to me is
around when they're out
undertaking a compliance visit for a certain person and there
is other people who are at the
location who are
acting in a way that would suspect that they would have reasonable cause to suspect
they're either in breach of their visa conditions or subject to
deportation because they're hiding, running away.
It happens regularly,
and the wording of the law at the moment is such that they can't ask
them who they are, ask them for their name to check whether or not they
are liable for deportation. So I'm open to really sensible safeguards
and refinements that strengthen transparency and public confidence while still
enabling the officers to carry out their duties effectively, and I understand
there's been some useful suggestions from submissions.
So there's lots more, but I know you'll have lots of questions, so I'm happy to
leave it there.
Wonderful. Well, we have our first question bid from Riccardo
Menegism.
Thank you very much, Chair. I've got some questions on Clause 26, but I've also got
them for Clause 12, 15, and 22.
Starting on Clause 26, Minister-
Can I just say which one it's about? Which one? What it's relating to?
This is the
stuff around relationship to have good cause or suspect, but then people may be in
breach of visa conditions-
Yeah, the one I just talked about?
And the powers for identification.
Yeah.
So when you've described the bill to Radio New Zealand, you said, "We have a big
overstayer problem." But then you've also characterized these changes as small
technical changes.
If overstaying is such a big problem, why do we need just a small
technical change to help address the situation?
Because those two things seem to be contradictory.
Well, lots of little changes can end up making a big impact.
This is just one thing that the compliance officers, when I've been out with them,
are really frustrated about. So let me paint the picture.
When I'll be going out with them, they will turn up, they're looking for this man,
they know he's there, "Hello, nice to meet you," and they can see three other
people who are hiding or one guy that just jumped out the window and ran away.
Right now, they can't even say to them, "Hello, what's your name?"
and ask them for their identity or their date of birth to check who they are
because the law is written in such a way that it says they are ...
You'll get me the wording exactly right.
They have to
have reasonable cause to suspect that they are liable for deportation.
That's correct, yes.
So that's a really high bar. They have to know
in advance who they are and that they're liable for deportation.
Now, obviously, if they're hiding and running away, and they haven't had a chance
to ask them who they are, that's really impossible.
So giving them the ability to sayAnd
this
good cause to suspect is well understood in case law.
It's been tested many times.
So having that good cause to suspect when they're on the course of their everyday
duty,
like those actions I've just described, and being able to ask them in the first
instance verbally, "What is your name and your date of birth?" And then
checking up on whether or not they do fall into that category, and then being able
to take the reasonable steps that follow after that.
Just got a couple more questions on Clause 26.
Yeah.
Deportations have already increased substantially over a little
while. Is it your goal to use these powers to subsequently
increase the number of deportations?
And if not,
do you have a goal to increase the number of deportations with this bill?
The purpose of this bill is to give the compliance officers
the tools that they need when they're out on the job.
They already have this tool in the act, but it's not worded in such a way that they
can use it.
That's the goal of this act.
And finally, you'll be aware of Operation Indigo.
I understand that there's checkpoints in the morning where people are getting
stopped and asked for, for example, identification as part of
that. How would you see Operation Indigo
operating differently with these powers?
Because again, it's not just about people being liable for deportation, but people
who may be deemed to be in breach of their visa conditions.
Say that there's a checkpoint in the morning, what would Immigration New Zealand be
doing differently?
This is very technical and operational.
Well, it's one of-
And I've got a technical and operational-
It's a big operation happening.
Yeah. I understand that, but I'm just going to throw to Steve, who's our head of
operations.
So,
nothing
would change in terms of Operation Indigo because if a
person was not acting in a way that was suspicious or raised
the curiosity of the compliance officer,
nothing would change. So
if a person tried to flee, for example-
Mm
... or they were hiding in the back of the car, that would trigger the
curiosity or the interest of the compliance officer, and then they
would move to the next step of the process.
The minister has used examples of sort of workplace visits and house visits, right?
But we know in Operation Indigo, as far as I understand, there's also sort of
checkpoints on the road.
I'm not aware of that, but-
Okay
... but you-
Well, I have received accounts from lawyers
who speak of their clients having been stopped early in the morning while going to
work, migrant workers.
Compliance officers don't have the power to stop vehicles.
No.
No, but there were police.
Okay. Well, that's a completely different thing.
Yes.
Yeah. Can I just-
So this is way outside the bill.
Yeah.
This is not-- I've not heard of this.
But compliance officers are with police in those morning stops, aren't they?
So can we come back to the bill, please, Ricardo? I'm going to now move on.
We've got a couple of bids for supplementary questions.
So we're going to go to Vanessa, then Phil, and then our next primary is Pamjeet.
Then we'll come back to you, Ricardo, for your follow-on questions.
Thank you.
Fantastic.
So Minister, along the lines of that we're talking about, what do you say to people
who say that these changes will make immigration similar to
some of the things we've seen, like ICE in the US or
other extreme cases like that? And what other
mechanisms or options are available for people who come here on a
visitor visa who then might need other assistance?
On that first point you made, they're completely wrong.
I appreciate there is lots of misunderstanding and sort of fear-mongering out
there.
Mm.
There are also people who should know better who appear to be deliberately
scaremongering about this proposal.
It is a very, very simple technical change,
to allow compliance officers to do their job.
Like I said, I've spent time with the very excellent people of the
immigration compliance team,
and being able to do absolutely nothing, and I think a reasonable New
Zealander would expect that if you are seeing that sort of behavior in front of
you, you should have the ability to at least ask for their name and their
date of birth to ascertain whether or not they are in breach of their
visa or liable for deportation. And so all the bill does is
just change the words that they are liable for
deportation to that they may be liable for deportation or in breach
of their visa conditions.
Mm.
So it allows them more effectively to do their job.
It is in very limited circumstances.
There is no general stopping power,
and the criteria that they use is not based on
ethnicity, which is what we've also heard from quite a
range of different scaremongering tactics around this is like ICE.
That is not one of the criteria that they use.
So it is a very narrow power. It is to help them to do their job, and it is
reasonable to expect if that
when they're out doing their jobs and they see that sort of behavior, that they've
got the right to be able to ask for
their
identification.
Thank you.
Phil's is going to become a primary, so we'll go to Pamjeet and we'll come back to
you, Phil.
Thank you. Minister, first I want to acknowledge your response to my letter, which
I wrote to you about extending the deportation power for very serious
offending for unlimited time. And I
also want to ask you that in your letter you have said that you will be-
It was relating to this bill
... looking at what the Select Committee says about increasing the deportation
viability for 10 years of residence.
So my question to you is that why there should be protection for
people, those who commit a serious offending, this is when they can be sentenced
for 10 years plus, for unlimited time
just because the time has passed. If the reason is that people
would have settled enough, then by 20 years also they would have settled
enough.
Look, I'd appreciate the committee's views on this.
It'll be interesting to see what you get from the submitters.
There are a number of things that have to be weighed up.
For example, if someone was a very young child when they gained residence,
and subsequently commits a very serious crime, as an adult,
are they a product of New Zealand? These are things I would like you to weigh up.
I mean, I'm interested in the committee's views on this.
I'm not-I'm not opposed to making changes, but
it just has to be carefully weighed and balanced and considered.
So I'll leave that with you and the submitters, but I'm open to making changes if
that's the will of the committee.
Thank you, Minister. So you said if somebody is quite young and commits
crime, but here up to 20 years of
residence we are talking about.
Yeah.
So are you saying that there should be some consideration given to-
There already is, Pamjeet. So in every single case, and you'll know this
well-
Mm
... there is discretion.
The
compliance officer will use discretion.
The Minister of Immigration can use discretion.
The delegated decision-makers can use discretion.
There's also the Immigration Protection Tribunal.
So there's a range of-
Mm
... sort of backstops. This is not like Australia, I guess,
where with the 501 situation, they have a very different policy.
I'm suggesting something that has more of those
backstops and ability for people with discretion
to be able to use that discretion in such a way that they would say, "Well,
actually,
the person may have been here for 20 years, but they came here as a child
and on balance we think XYZ."
Yeah.
So there are enough things that are built into the system to be
able to take that into consideration.
But what this does is in the case of the Jazz brothers who've been here for more
than 10 years, there was nothing that we could do after the heinous crimes that
they committed, and I think most reasonable New Zealanders would say we should at
least have the ability to issue a deportation liability notice or
have that tool available to us, and then look at the discretion after that to
say, okay, well,
on balance, the crime that they committed, how long have they been here,
what age were they when they became a resident, and all of those things.
And so that discretion is built into the system and is always a backstop.
And that is-
Thank you. Sorry, Pamjeet
... these are the two reasons why I think it can be for unlimited time-
Pamjeet
... the decision can be applied.
Questions are through the chair, and we're now moving on to Phil Twyford.
Minister, I wanted to ask you about your plan
to take away the right of appeal to the IPT on
humanitarian grounds for all visitor visas and temporary visa
holders who've plead guilty of being-
Can I interject on that?
... of an offense.
Mm-hmm.
Humanitarian appeals have been around for several decades.
They have always been seen by successive governments, and
the sector as a very important safety valve.
Mm.
I think there's a very robust jurisdiction
on this,
and
almost the justification for this proposal has been framed so far in terms of
administrative efficiency.
Mm.
I'm not aware that any evidence has been provided at all of any
risk to the public, any absconding, any other
negative consequences. It's all been framed around administrative efficiency, and
I wonder
how you can justify taking away such an important
element of due process for people in our system on the grounds
only of administrative efficiency.
Well, firstly, I'd say we're not taking it away because there are still backstops-
Yes
... that they're able to go to the minister,
which is what we'd expect them to do.
But we are living in a very rapidly changing world.
Not only are we seeing the numbers of asylum seekers spike
massively, we're also seeing the number of
people who are appealing, who are here on temporary visas.
Now that's really important. Temporary visas. So you're here on a visitor visa.
The reason for your stay is that you are here for a short period of time, and
that's the whole purpose of you coming.
If there are extenuating circumstances, you are able to go, there are other avenues
for you.
Mm-hmm.
But I just want to give you some numbers, because in 2018, 2019, the number who
were appealing was 135, and now it's 622.
That is a massive increase, and what it is showing me is like the
asylum claims, there are people who are using the
process to stay here for an extended period of time, because that
basically adds another 200 days onto your stay in New Zealand, where we
don't have all the deportation things stop at that point when you go to
the IPT. So,
it's really important here to also separate out the two types of people.
I think you're potentially worried about long-term overstayers.
There are two types of people, and this bill is about the
people who are here on a visitor visa or that short-term
visitor visa. If you're here long-term legal overstayer,
what we do in a process-wise to let you go to the IPT is
issue you a one-day visa to trigger your ability to go to the IPT.
You'll be aware of that, Mr. Twyford.
So
we will still continue to do that. We will give them a one-day work visa or student
visa or whatever it is, for them to be able to appeal.
So set that to one side. And that
is a lot of these appeals. But there are quite a number now
of these visitor visa appeals who are, we believe, that are
using the system to be able to stay.
So if there is a genuine reason for you to
want to appeal
or have your circumstances considered, that backstop still exists.
But what we are trying to do at the moment is, A,
discourage people from using it as an option to just remain in
New Zealand,
and to, yeah, you're right, procedurally unclog the IPT who have
huge backlogs for genuine people.
Mm.
People who genuinely have reasons that they need to stay in New Zealand, and their
claims are taking a long time to get heard
because of this. So still the backstop.
So,
is there in fact a workable, satisfactory other backstop?
Judicial review is very narrow and very expensive and
almost impossible to use for claimants in this situation.
And as much as I'm an advocate for the
discretion that's exercised by the associate minister, that is
not a consistent judicially based, principle based
process. There's no transparency at allIt's not
comparable to the IPT's jurisdiction.
I want to draw your attention-
Well, can I just, on that point-
Yes
... on that point, because that's an interesting point. We discussed this.
Actually, the bar that they would have to meet at the IPT is far higher-
It is
... than a bar that they would have to meet from a minister.
So actually,
it would be, if you're arguing it that way, they're probably slightly
more likely to have that discretion used if it was the minister.
So the bar for the humanitarian test is very difficult.
It's very hard.
It is very hard. But in spite-
But the point is they're not waiting for that.
They're using it to stay that extra 200 days.
Well, yeah. But it's also an indication that I think the system is currently
working. It is robust, it is principle-based, and it's
transparent. And in 2024,
67% of humanitarian
appeals by non-residents involve appellants whose last
visa was a visitor visa. That's about 100 individuals and
their families. So if you do this,
the risk is that hundreds of
New Zealanders and people who are in this country temporarily,
including many families-
Yeah, I understand your point
... will be split up.
Can I challenge you on that?
What's the question?
No, I get the question. I get the question. Go.
Can you defend that, Minister?
I can defend it because what you're not understanding in that number,
and I'll get my officials to get back to make sure I'm correct on this, but in that
number, what I tried to explain before are the two different types of people that
we give visitor visas to, to apply for the IPT.
So a large proportion of that, I would suggest the vast majority of
those claims you're talking about are long-term overstayers whose
last visa may have been a visitor visa, but they've been overstaying for
years and years and years, and we have given them a one-day visitor
visa to be able to go to the IPT. That will still exist.
That will not change. Remember I said before, we will still give them a one-day
work visa, student visa, something else.
The proportion of people who are actually here and have only been
here for a short term, maybe just outside of their 42 days of appeal rights, may
have been here for, I don't know, 50, 60 days.
The number of those people who are applying to the IPT is not
the bulk of that. It is much smaller, but it is still-
You haven't provided that
data.
That's, well, that's something we can-
We can get that. We can get that
... we can talk about.
That's-
So, but that's what I'm trying to explain, that when you look at that big number,
what you're seeing predominantly is people who've been here for a very long time
overstaying. We've given them a one-day visa so they can appeal to the IPT.
Okay. So-
But that won't change
... so 52% of deportation
appeals were allowed in '24, '25. They were
upheld by the IPT. They were found to be justified.
They got over that very high humanitarian test
that is applied. And the people we're talking about here are the
partners of New Zealand citizens, they're the victims of family violence,
they're the parents of New Zealand citizens, and the children of New Zealand
citizens. And you're taking away due process for those people and
offering them something that is far inferior.
Well, I would disagree with you. I don't think it's inferior.
They still have a right to be able to have their case heard, and where there are
exceptional circumstances, that will be considered.
But the associate minister can decline to even consider these cases.
That's not comparable-
So-
... to an IPT appeal process.
Phil, can I just say the minister's given an answer. You may not agree with it.
I need to move on to the supplementary.
You're right. I don't.
So,
Ricardo, your supplementary on this.
Yeah.
And then we'll move on to the next parliament.
Yeah. Thank you. Several stakeholders particularly noted the
impact of the changes to humanitarian appeal on children,
some of them noting that it has serious implication for children.
Example,
a disabled child who may be facing risk of being
separated from the family, or someone who may have had an
injury while in the country, become disabled, and now doesn't meet the acceptable
standards of health. What do you think will be the impact of these changes on
children? And do you agree with the concerns from stakeholders that have serious
consequences for them?
I don't agree. There are still avenues for them to appeal.
Steve, can I just... Because we talked about children the other night.
Yeah. I think we pass that to Sue.
Okay.
To Melissa.
Yeah, Melissa.
So in terms of
children,
when
a person is issued a deportation liability notice, there's a
humanitarian appeal, and the compliance officers
must consider the impacts of the children.
And then in the act is actually the requirement for immigration
officers to make sure that they're adhering to
international obligations. So that is baked into the
legislation already.
So, but many of them may be on a visitor visa, for example.
And
while in the risks it's noted that people can go to the High Court or the Office of
the Ombudsman, et cetera, we know that those avenues are
extremely costly. Do you think that there is a risk
that children could potentially face life-threatening
situations as a result of these changes?
And in context, while I hear the minister's
reassurances, that is reliant on the current minister, not a future
minister choosing to take that same approach.
So what do you
say in terms of concerns that children could be put in potentially
life-threatening conditions?
Well, as we've already said, and you can
continue after me, is that we still have to comply with our international
obligations. That is baked into the law.
So that
won't happen because we have to take that into consideration.
So-
But there's been children who have been threatened to be deported despite,
and that hasn't been factored in. We've seen cases in the news
already. So you may say that, but I have had to fight some of these
cases themselves where clearly that hasn't been taken into account.
So
are you reassuring me that that's consistently applied across the board?
We take into account lots of things.
We take into account a number of considerations.
But Stacy, I'll throw to you because you deal in this land all the time.
Yeah. So I think if we separate out the
appeal pathway and then deportation
pathway, so
as part of that, we have to go through checks and balances to make sure
that we're not going to breach international obligations such as
the rights of the children and the compliance officers.
Part of their training is around the humanitarian
interview, understanding what the sections in the act mean
to minimize the risks of that happening.
So
I think every case will have different
circumstances, but that doesn't remove the fact that we have
to go through those steps. The protections are there as
part of the deportation process.
Thank you. Now we need to move on to our next primary question, which we have Grant
McCallum.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair. Minister, at the top of your
briefing, you talked about the case of Diana.
I just want to understand, so were you saying that the
individual concerned that was charged with
whatever the offense against Diana was,
because they were already in the process for another reason, that other evidence,
was that not able to be taken into account properly or?
Yeah. It's the ability for her to make a statement on the
impacts.
Because the original case was taken because of a drug as
opposed to her.
Yeah.
So therefore she couldn't-
So what we find with many of these people is that there are multiple offenses that
they commit.
Mm.
And
it's not all of those offenses together that cause the deportation
liability in order to be
served. It will be one particular thing, and in this case, it was a drug
offense. And then while on parole-
All these other things happened
... he committed some pretty heinous crimes.
But that wasn't the reason for the deportation-
No
... it was around the drug offense.
And so
that's where this anomaly has come up.
And it just means that those victims of crime aren't able to make a statement.
So
all this is going to do is allow her to-
Yep
... present her-
So any victims of any crimes-
Yep
... whether they led to the deportation liability notice or not, will be taken into
account.
Great. Thank you.
So we've got about two minutes left.
I know you've both got bids for further questions.
Can I ask, are there any clauses we haven't discussed that you have questions on,
rather than asking questions on clauses we've already discussed?
Another aspect.
Another aspect of a clause we've already discussed. All right.
I think given that, you had a supplementary on that one question, and then we'll
go to you.
Yeah, just I guess on the broader narrative of going after criminals, I
know you've used
some examples. One of the commentary I've seen from the public a lot on
social media has been this narrative that people who are overstayers are
criminals themselves. What would you like to say to the public who
sometimes may hire
overstayers with an idea of criminality?
Well, if you're overstaying your visa, you are in breach of
those visa conditions, and it is time to leave.
We have a range of things available
within Immigration to try and regularize people, and that's sort of the first step
always, is to try and get people back
on a legal pathway. But
a compliance officer's job is to make sure that people are abiding by the
conditions of their visa. And where they are not, they will issue deportation
liability notices. The job
of the Immigration Minister, of course, is to make sure we're protecting New
Zealanders. And
across all-
From what?
... of this legislation,
there are people who've been committing crimes, whether they're overstayers,
asylum seekers, or just
residents. And we're making sure that in all of those areas,
that we're sending a very clear message.
You are here,
and we expect you to abide by our laws, and if you don't, then it will be time
to leave. Unless there are extenuating circumstances, which we still always have
backstops for. But we are unapologetically
tightening up and making it so that a deportation is more likely to happen
if you are a criminal offender and creating victims of crime.
I think that's a great place to leave it. Thank you.
I'm sorry, unfortunately-
Come on, Chair. Just give us one more minute.
We have-- No, we've got a very, very tight timeline, and you have said it's not a
new part.
I seek leave.
No, we don't have the time, unfortunately, Phil.
We've got more time with officials. Thank you very much, Minister.
Thank you to the officials for being part of this process.
And we're now here to hear from our next submitter.
Our next submitter is Migrants Against the Acceptable Standard of Health
Aotearoa. Marsha. And
I'm really sorry, I want to say Aina Kelly Costello.
Kia ora. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can. Please, I'm sorry, you might want to introduce the pronunciation of
your name. I'm sorry if I've got that incorrect.
Aine. That's okay.
Aine. Perfect. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, and
that does include time for questions. Hand over to you to now.
Thank you.
So yes, my name is Aine. I am here on behalf of
Migrants Against the Acceptable Standard of Health Aotearoa, and
we exist to
be led by migrants and refugees impacted by the
acceptable standard of health disability discrimination, to support
people impacted,
and to advocate against this discrimination.
We oppose this bill, and we recommend it be withdrawn.
And I caught the last five minutes of that conversation, and I thought I would
just start off by addressing a few of
the points around particularly whether
there's a tendency towards a general conflation of
overstaying a visa and criminality.
Because what we have very consistently heard from our group is
that a lot of people, a lot of families coming here, often in the
sectors where we most need people, school teachers, nurses,
umThose kind of roles where we're saying we'd really love
migrants to come fill them. People are working really
hard
and contributing in a lot of diverse ways to our country,
even to things like coaching sports teams and the
children and teenagers doing their best at school and all of that.
And because of something that's completely out of their control, a disability or a
health condition, to be lumped in with, oh,
you're committing a crime. It's something that we've really consistently
heard is really offensive actually,
and really, really unjust, particularly when
actually fighting against this policy and just trying to find
some acceptance from the immigration system is the hardest
experience that many people have gone through in their lives.
That's what we've been told by our members.
And what we really often hear as well is that this
immigration policy is a huge contrast to what they're
experiencing in the rest of Aotearoa, that often they really are feeling very
welcome and feeling very accepted and
life is otherwise really going quite well other than these
requirements. So tied in with that,
we want to draw attention to the removal of
IPT appeal rights for people on temporary
non-work study visas.
Because actually, if the minister was saying there that humanitarian
obligations are supposed to be protected, this directly flies in the face of
that. So,
as an example of one family we've been working with who did an
IPT appeal last year
for their son who has end-stage kidney
disease to be able to stay in the
country with them. And they're all
permanent residents, I think. I can't remember.
And that came off the back of the minister granting a one-day
visitor visa to open up that appeal pathway and that
appeal granted a 12-month student visa, the longest
visa that the IPT was able to grant.
So that was a really important safeguard for someone
who's needing life-saving medical care
that is better available here compared to in Fiji, and to
be with his family as a teenager going through something horrific like that,
to be able to stay in the country. And much as we do oppose the
acceptable standard of health requirements, and you're all aware of that,
the other effect of removing the IPT pathway in these
circumstances is it's going to backlog the ministerial intervention system
even further, because generally people are expected to go through all these
different pathways to exhaust all avenues first.
And also, IPT
recommendations and rulings are theoretically, at least, supposed to provide
a guide or a sense of direction for the minister.
So we strongly oppose that.
The other provision that we oppose strongly is the
ID gathering, sort of information gathering
powers for people seen to potentially be in breach of visa
conditions. And I stress potentially here because there is every
likelihood that this could lead to increased racial
and disability profiling in general.
And that's just heightening the sense of
precarity and lack of safety that people are
living in generally. As well as probably pushing people who
actually
may be quite within their rights and eligible for things like healthcare,
further away from feeling able to
go to the doctor when they're sick
for fear of
anything coming up on their record or being profiled in any of
these ways.
So we strongly oppose these provisions, and I am happy to take
questions.
Thank you very much. We have a question first from Vanessa Weening, and then we'll
go to Ricardo.
Thank you very much for your submission and for speaking to us this
morning. Although
I can understand people
not liking the idea of being called criminals,
do you accept that by staying in New
Zealand outside of your visa from
stipulations that you have in fact breached the law?
So you've broken the law and most people would say that somebody who breaks the law
is a criminal.
Although it's not a criminal offense as such. You've broken the law.
Well, that's-
It's a crime to break the law.
So I think that our position against the acceptable standard of health
requirements has always been really clear that this
particular set of rules goes against international
human rights law. And yes, it is the case that our national
human rights law in this regard is not consistent with international law.
But we have always opposed that policy on those grounds,
in line therefore with international law.
And I'd raise as well that we have recommendations from the
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as well as the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, UN committees,
both saying that this policy needs to be reformed
in conjunction with migrants with disabilities
and health conditions because of that.
So I think the conflation of the idea that someone happens to be
disabled, including children, with the idea
of committing a crime or violence, is really unjust.
No, I've said that they're overstaying their and breaching their visa,
not that they're disabled, just-
Yeah, I understood you
Thank you. We have a question from Ricardo.
Anything-
Yeah, just two quick ones. First of all, can you confirm that some of these
overstayers that you're talking about are children?
Most of them.
Yeah. And secondly,
would you be able to expand on the comments you made
around the ministerial backlog, particularly what's been your experience with the
fact that a minister does not have to provide any reasons for a decline compared
to, say, avenues like the IPT where it's a bit more robust and you are able to
get more transparency. What are your concerns around that, including
potential delays, uncertainty, and negative impacts on children
particularly?
Yeah. So being in limbo for this policy, is often the
state that people are in for years on end,
seven, eight, nine years, including also families whose children
are basically overseas and where you end up with cases of family
separation. And one of the hardest things we've seen for families is the
declines, by which I mean the
decline to look at a request. So sometimes a minister will say,
"I decline to..." Not that the request itself is declined,
but they're not even going to look at it, and without a reason given
often. So that's really difficult, because
it feels like there's no sense of justice in that.
And, with the IPT, at least you are assured of a
thorough process.
You are assured of a process that you can look back at and you can, even if
you disagree with them, you know how they reached their conclusion.
So there's a robustness to that.
Thank you.
Is there time for one quick follow-up?
You had your two steps, but very quickly if you can make it succinct.
Very quickly. Yeah, thank you. One of the other avenues that was noted in the risk
is that people can just go to the High Court or the Ombudsman.
Have any of the families that you've worked with, have had the means to be able to
meet the costs and the ability to actually pursue those avenues?
No.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Anya. Appreciate your participation in the process and your
time with us this morning.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to, I understand we've got Pacific Legal online,
with Richard Small.
Good morning.
Good morning, Richard. We can hear you. We can't see you.
I'm-
Ah, there we go. But you might need to lift your laptop.
Richard, your camera's on your laptop. There you go.
Right. Okay. Thank you.
So I've been listening to the minister, and I thought that it would be helpful to
speak to my submission and the Law
Association submission, which I'm also a part of, in light of the minister's and
the officials' comments. There are
three areas really I've addressed in my
submission. The first,
based on 35 years experience in this field, and about,
we think, we can't really count the early days, we think about
1,200
section 61 and related appeals or
requests,
and 100 or so appeals. So a lot of road testing
and reality in our practice. And so in terms of
reality testing, the IPT is a very
important safeguard. And the
minister is correct that there are one-day visas.
That is true, but the access to those visas is
purely discretionary. So we go back to the point that was
raised,
that there is no transparency of discretionary decision-making in this
area.
Mm-hmm.
So basically, we're back to square one with that.
In '87, just before I started practice, I haven't been here that
long,
all of these discussions were had.
And the previous
approach, which is what the minister says will be a sufficient safeguard,
was clearly understood to be insufficient in
this area.
And so there was a statutory test established of exceptional
humanitarian circumstances. It stood the test of time,
through the '91 amendments, the no advantage principle,
and the 1999 amendments, first
nationals transitional period, and then later
the
amnesty that was introduced with that massive change that
moved the appeal from after a removal warrant,
as it was originally called, was served and went through a court process with legal
aid. This is how far the landscape has shifted to 42 days after
becoming unlawful. And it's quite true that victims of domestic
violence that we act for are not counting off
42 days on a calendar.
Especially those that are unlawful and who are at most risk.
And neither are children, and neither are partners in many situations.
So it is correct that there are one-day visas, but these go through the same
gateway, the section 61 team, which I also want to touch on,
because we have road-tested that very recently actually,
in such a case.
Or alternatively, if they haven't, through various
restrictions, been excluded, they go through the associate minister or more
commonly a DDM, delegated decision-maker.
Since 2015, an Amendment Act that Mr.
Twyford may remember,
that Labor expressed concern about,
section 11 was changed and access to reasons was
removed. Now this renders any form of complaint
virtually nugatory.
If you don't have access to the reasons that a decision was made,
you can't review it. In most cases, you can't review it.
The Ombudsman themselves, if you look at page three of my
submission,
has made that very clear.And I don't say that in any
theoretical way. We had one quarter of the
ombudsman's immigration caseload in
2015, one quarter,
and those cases evaporated
with that law change that removed access to reasons
for Section 61 decisions.
So it is correct that these rights exist in theory, but in
practice, it's the IPT that provide a transparent process.
So that's an important point to make, that there is a hurdle to get
through to even access one-day visas.
It's a non-transparent hurdle, and there is no obligation on the
minister, or the DDM, or the associate to even look at the case.
There is no transparency in the numbers.
To my understanding,
we don't know the ethnic breakdown of Section
61 decisions.
And I have asked after a horrific series of
refusals for a vic-- And I commend the minister on
focusing on victims, and it would be consistent with that spirit to
consider victims who are unlawful.
And unfortunately, these changes do not do that.
If anything, they increase the risks for those people.
And we have had a recent case where there was a GBH
conviction
against the perpetrator who was deported, which is great.
Good to see the system working.
But the partner and children then faced
refusal after refusal from the Section 61 team,
despite the recommendation of the court, which it doesn't
happen all the time, and despite the recommendation of the police.
I'm not suggesting
that these kind of decisions happen all the time, but when we
pushed the issue,
Immigration New Zealand focused on absolute discretion.
They said, "The thing that we need to preserve in this mix is absolute discretion."
I disagree. We have obligations under CEDAW.
We have obligations to victims of domestic violence, even if they're unlawful.
We decriminalized overstaying in
'87, and we should not recriminalize it.
So that is not a case of someone playing the system.
That is a case of
someone being at risk of being returned to harm or even death.
And that case went through the ombudsman, who acknowledged our concerns,
but Immigration New Zealand declined to audit the Section 61 team.
The point I'm making here is that the so-called alternatives
lack transparency,
and tragic cases do come through.
The other one I wanted to emphasize in this area is that there are
people who have, for various reasons, had a change in
circumstances. They're here on a visitor visa, and an adult
child has suddenly dropped dead, as in one of our cases.
Someone has a terminal cancer
diagnosis. I am not aware of this large number
of people playing the system as seems to be suggested, and
neither
does the success rate of the IPT objectively support
that. It is a high success rate. And I would
turn the suggestion that there's been a
spike in appeals around and say, what does that reflect
about the Section 61 and first instance visa
decision-making? What does that reflect about
the discretion to issue a visa as an exception to instructions?
And maybe a harder line at that level is what is fueling some of the
appeals. You'll hear from, I hope, TLA later at 1:00
today.
When you come to that, if you look at paragraph 9.34
in the Law Association submission, you'll see a
table there that shows that actually appeals
have
had peaks and dips over a number of years.
So I'm not quite suggesting this is a manufactured crisis,
but I don't think the picture is as simple as a sudden spike out
of nowhere. And this is not the highest level of appeals we've had.
It's part of a process post-COVID.
Briefly, because I know you want time for questions, so on
that, I would urge the committee,
if this change is going to go through, to consider
accepting perhaps family-sponsored visa
holders.
That might be one way of ameliorating.
It won't be complete, but it might be something.
This is not about individuals playing the system.
This is about families
who reach a very high threshold, as the minister's acknowledged, with a
sudden and genuine change in circumstances.
And to suggest that the Section 61
team is an easy pathway is
risible.
It is not, and not especially for these humanitarian cases.
Briefly touching on the other changes that have been discussed that we've also
submitted on,
we're concerned about Section 158.
No one else has commented on this, so maybe I can add value.
Page
four, I think it is, of my submission.
For my sins,
as well as submitting for the New Zealand Law Society on this actual act,
I was closely involved with the Immigration Advisers Licensing
Act. Our practice unusually
engages in complaints against
unlicensed advisers and has supported the
IAA, the Immigration Advisers Authority, to prosecute them.
We have an epidemic of unlicensed advice in the
Pacific. There are no licensed immigration advisers in Tonga.
None. Absolutely none, and there are few in other
countries. And Immigration New Zealand in plain sight
knows that unlicensed travel agents, in breach, I
believe, of the Licensing Act, are submitting
systemically and for-fee applications.
Thank you, Richard. We've unfortunately reached the end of our time with you this
morning.
Okay.
We do appreciate your very technical and helpful submission, though, both written
and verbal.
Yeah.
And appreciate you participating in the process. Thank you.
Thanks.
Committee, just checking again, we don't have David Rychen available, so we'll
give him an opportunity to reschedule.
But we'll move for the sake of this afternoon's efficiency to
items from 2.6.